---
title: Stop Writing Useless Tests
category: testing
layout: post
tags: [testing, metrics, TDD]
---

#tl;dr;
_Setting an arbitary target for code coverage, mocking, "unit" testing and other is short sighted. There are other fundamental problems that exist (and need to be solved) if you feel you need to force any kind of coverage target._

#100% covered doesn't mean it's asserted
I have a _mutation program_ that will systematically change your implementation code. This _mutation program_ will delete lines, change conditionals, return early from void methods, among other things. After this _mutation program_ changes the implementation code. It'll run the tests that you've written. If the tests pass. It checks in the change. Your code is covered 100% right? Would you run this _mutation program_ against your code base? Let's see an example of what this _mutation program_ will do.

Here is some code that is covered 100%.

    //the class
    public class Person {
      public string SayHello() { 
        return "Hello";
      }
    }

    class describe_Person {
      //the test where all Person methods are exercised
      void it_says_hello() {
        var person = new Person();

        //see, right here, we called the method!
        person.SayHello();
      }
    }

The _mutation program_ will change the `SayHello` method into this:

    public string SayHello() { 
      return "";
    }

All tests pass. So the _mutation program_ checks it in.

**Do you know what this  _mutation program_ is? It's you, the developer. We refactor code all the time, tests like the one above have high coverage, but no value. Infact a code coverage tool would give the false impression that changes to the `SayHello` method are safe.**

##
