---
title: Why Emacs?
category: software-development
layout: post
tags : [code]
---

## tl;dr; ##

Used Visual Studio for many years. Used Vim for many years. Changed to
Emacs because its Vim bindings were spot on, and the editor provides
discoverability elements that make it easy to extend.

If your editor can do the key points under the "The List of Things You
Should Know How to Do With Your Editor", then there is no reason to
pick up Emacs. If your editor can't do the things in this list (or
it's very very hard and not fun to do), then you are not using an IDE,
you're using a ball and chain clasped firmly around your neck. You're
going to spend probably _two decades_ coding, why be hindered by your
IDE throughout this journey?

# History: Moving Away From Visual Studio to Vim #

I started to move away from Visual Studio back in 2010. I had to do
build automation using Rake, and Visual Studio's Ruby support was
nonexistent. That and I was doing more JavaScript, SCSS, and LESS. All
of which had sub par (nonexistent) support. I did all my C# development
in Visual Studio, but any other text editing that needed to be done,
was in Vim.

After a while, I got really good and using Vim bindings and felt
utterly broken in Visual Studio. Moving around using the mouse and
arrow keys added so much _cognitive overhead_ when all I wanted to do
was get what I had in my head, through the keyboard, and on the screen
as fast as possible. The best way to explain Vim bindings is this:

>Imagine you're a samurai with a razor sharp sword, contemplating how
>to take down your opponent. You think. You visualize how you'll cut
>down your foe. Your blade remains sheathed, because you aren't ready
>to strike just yet.
>
>Clarity comes, and the path to victory can be seen in your mind's
>>eye. You unsheath your katana to attack. Within an instant, each
>intricate slash is executed, and your blade is placed back at your
>side. Your foe falls. A butterfly, caught fluttering in the fray of
>your blade, splits in half mid flight... only after realizing it's
>been cut.

The unsheathing of the blade is synonymous to going into Vim's insert
mode. Using the mouse and arrow keys, is synonymous to a combination
padlock latched on to your sheath (which has to be unlocked every time
you want to use it).

With Vim bindings, the cognitive overhead _between_ "thinking time"
and "writing time" _disappeared_.

What I also found was that my ability to edit code in _all_ languages
increased (albeit with a small productivity loss in editing C#). The
same key bindings and motions could be applied to refactor code, no
matter the language. I want to reiterate this, **Vim bindings makes you
efficient in editing and refactoring code in _all_ languages, at the
cost of extreme efficiency in one.**

That's what happened to me. **It became more important for me to be
proficient in editing the sum of JavaScript, Rake, CSS, SCSS, Html5,
Jade, and Markdown, over just being efficient in editing C#.**

I went so far as [creating a set of instructions for coding C# in Vim
on Windows back in 2012](https://github.com/amirrajan/katanspec/) when
it wasn't cool to use an editor other than Visual Studio to code C#.

# History: Moving Away From Vim (but sticking with Vim bindings) #

My main motivation for moving away from Vim was VimScript and the [Tim
Pope Bus](http://www.vim.org/account/profile.php?user_id=9012) (if Tim
Pope die, I and many Vim users are screwed). I just didn't want to
invest in learning VimScript, but felt that my lack of scripting
knowledge was limiting my ability to extend Vim even further than my
plugin suite. Yes, I'm aware of NeoVim, and if you can do "the list of
things you should know how to do with your editor", in NeoVim, then
you're gold.

Aside: Emacs's Vim bindings are incredible. As stated earlier, I can't
imagine editing code without them. **It's the main reason why I
couldn't make the switch to editors such as Sublime, Atom, Eclipse, or
Xamarin Studio, XCode, AppCode, et al. These other editors have
cursory Vim support, but nuanced commands just aren't there (such as
`[ESC]Ctrl+V 5j$A;[ESC]` which appends semicolons at the end of 5 lines).**

## Typing Speed and Editing Proficiency ##

Typing and editing proficiency is important. I get this a lot
when I bring up this subject:

>If you're worried about typing speed and editor proficiency, you're
>not thinking enough.

Of course I'm thinking enough (_everyone_ thinks enough). _In fact, I
want to be able to read and edit code at the speed of thought._ From
the moment I decide I need to inspect a file/method/line of arbitrary
code, I want to instantaneously be there and reading. From the moment
I decide I need to edit something, I want to be able to
instantaneously edit it so I can move to my next thought bubble. We
have a 30+ terraflops of computing power up there, but response times
down in the 13 ms range. Don't tell me I'm not thinking enough.

Specific to Vim bindings. _They are universal and editor agnostic._
Most editors support at least cursory Vim bindings (eg. ViEmu for Visual
Studio, Vintage Mode for Sublime Text). Additionally, depending on the
language you are required to use, you'll have to change editors
(unless you're using Emacs, yes I went there):

- If you're coding in C#, chances are you'll be in Visual Studio.
- Objective C? Say hello to XCode!
- Ruby? Well you can't us Visual Studio to write ruby (specifically
  the `^M` whitespace character that will be added to every line.

In essence, as much as you think you have control over the editor you
choose, you really don't. So _at least_ get proficient with universal Vim
bindings if you don't want to invest in Emacs.

# The List of Things You Should Know How to Do With Your Editor #

**This is the list, if your editor can't do these things with
ease. Find another editor. You're going to be coding for one to two
decades. Put some investment in it dammit.**

Here is a challenge. Extend your editor to do the following:

I want `Ctrl+!` to move my cursor down twice. If I the character to
the right of the cursor is a vowel, I want it to move once right.

## 1. Your Editor Should Let You See What Function is Invoked When Pressing a Key ##

The challenge requires me to press down twice, and (conditionally)
right once. To figure out what functions are invoked to move down and
and right, I press `F1, k`, followed by the array key `<down>` (and `<right>`). Here is what
gets printed in the editor when I do this.

For `<down>` I get the following:

```
<down> runs the command next-line, which is an interactive compiled
Lisp function in `simple.el'.

It is bound to <down>.

(next-line &optional ARG TRY-VSCROLL)

Move cursor vertically down ARG lines.
Interactively, vscroll tall lines if `auto-window-vscroll' is enabled.
Non-interactively, use TRY-VSCROLL to control whether to vscroll tall
lines: if either `auto-window-vscroll' or TRY-VSCROLL is nil, this
function will not vscroll.

ARG defaults to 1.
```

For `<right>` I get the following:

```
<right> runs the command right-char, which is an interactive compiled
Lisp function in `bindings.el'.

It is bound to <right>.

(right-char &optional N)

Move point N characters to the right (to the left if N is negative).
On reaching beginning or end of buffer, stop and signal error.
```

## 2. Your Editor Should Let You Execute an Editor Function Arbitrary ##

Let's say I want to just invoke `next-line`. Here is how I do that. I
press `Alt+:` to bring up my mini buffer (this is where I can execute
commands). And I type `(next-line)` and press `enter`.

Let's say I want to just invoke `right-char`. Here is how I do that. I
press `Alt+:` to bring up my mini buffer (this is where I can execute
commands). And I type `(right-char 5)` and press `enter`.

## 3. Your Editor Should Let You See the Source for a Function ##

Per the challenge, I need to only move right if the character to the
right of me is a vowel. I could take a look at how `right-char` is
implemented (since it doesn't let me move right past the end of the
line). I press `F1,f` and then type `move-right` and press
`enter`. Here is what I get.

```
right-char is an interactive compiled Lisp function in `bindings.el'.

```

I can then press enter on `bindings.el` link and be taken to the
function to see how it's implemented. If there is something called in
that function that I don't understand, I simply run `F1,f` for _that_
function and follow the rabbit hole down as deep as I want. I can
experiment and try any function I want by using `Alt+:`.

## 4. Your Editor Should Let You Define a Function Ad Hoc ##

After I have a good understanding of what functions I need to use, I
can open up a scratch buffer and start playing around. Here is the
initial function I define in my scratch buffer:

```lisp
(defun foobar ()
  (interactive)
  (next-line)
  (next-line))
```

I then put my cursor at the end of the function definition and type
`eval-last-sexp`, which adds the function to Emacs. I can execute the
function with `Alt+:`, then type `foobar`, then press `enter`.

## Before We Continue, Let Me Reiterate ##

Can the editor you work with let you easily do the four steps above,
really think about it. This is not a difficult function to write, and
lets me become incrementally more proficient with the code I'm
writing. Here are some real world example functions I've hobbled
together:

- Expand the current split.
- Make all splits the same size.
- Make a new split below the current one, and open up a fuzzy file
  finder.
- Make a new split to the right of the current one, and open up a
  fuzzy file finder.
- Resize window to 80 characters.
- Send the currently highlighted line to a buffer and execute the line
  (it's great for evaluating things in a repl). Conditionally start up
  the right repl given the `major-mode` I'm in.

**These were all stitched together using the four steps above.**

- I figure out what functions are called within those plugins `F1,k`.
- I get documentation/descriptions for these plugins.
- I look at the source of those functions and figure out what I need
  to do what I want to do `F1,f`.
- I play around interactively using `Alt+:`.
- I create a scratch file to build out my function until the function
  does what I need.

## That's Cool and All, but I Don't Need That. My Editor Already Does What I Need It to Do ##

Well, at least you now understand why Emacs is so powerful. And after
reading at least this much, you may be more aware of all the minor
inefficiencies that you currently deal with (the add up, especially
over _decades_ of coding).


TODO:

- Search for related functions.
- It has an easy way for me to bind a function to a leader key combination (evil-leader).
- Easy to view source for a function I'm using.
- It isn't vim script, I'm off the Tim Pope bus, Mads Kritchesten bus.
